Add draft of TS 7 post (#9938)
Microsoft/vscode-docs: blogs/2026/06/19/iterating-faster-with-ts-7.md

---
Order:
TOCTitle: Iterating faster with TypeScript 7
PageTitle: Iterating faster with TypeScript 7
MetaDescription: How the VS Code and TypeScript teams collaborated to adopt TypeScript 7 and speed up VS Code development
MetaSocialImage: TODO
Date: 2025-06-19
Author: Matt Bierner
Keywords: [TypeScript]
---

VS Code and TypeScript practically grew up together. We made a bet early on to write VS Code in TypeScript, and we have always worked closely with the TypeScript team to provide great built-in TypeScript and JavaScript language support in VS Code. This post is about the next step of that journey: TypeScript 7, and how collaborating on adopting TypeScript 7 sped up our builds, improved the day-to-day editing loop for both developers and agents, and helped the TypeScript team ship a more tested release.

> TypeScript 7 is a [ground-up rewrite of the TypeScript compiler and language tooling in Go](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/typescript/typescript-native-port/). That means it's fast, more than 10x faster in many cases. VS Code had a lot to gain from those speedups, so we were naturally eager to adopt TypeScript 7 as soon as we could.

Reviewer: "ground-up rewrite" -> "complete port"

## An incremental migration
The VS Code team has never been afraid to take on large engineering efforts, whether that's enabling [strict null checking in our codebase](https://code.visualstudio.com/blogs/2019/05/23/strict-null), adding [remote development support](https://code.visualstudio.com/blogs/2019/05/02/remote-development), or addressing and preventing dangerous code patterns across thousands of files. A common theme across these efforts is that we try to take an incremental approach. This means breaking big, complex problems down into small steps. Those steps happen in the main codebase (no forks or long-lived branches), and each one usually brings a small improvement as it lands. Take enough little steps, and eventually you can look back and realize that you've quietly conquered that once seemingly insurmountable challenge.

> We wanted to take the same approach to adopting TypeScript 7. For us, that meant gradually introducing TypeScript 7 into different parts of our workflows and codebases, starting with lower-impact, lower risk areas before eventually moving on to the main areas of VS Code. There are many benefits to working incrementally, but two were especially important for this effort:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We wanted to take the same approach to adopting TypeScript 7. For us, that meant gradually introducing TypeScript 7 into different parts of our workflows and codebases, starting with lower-impact, lower-risk areas before eventually moving on to the main areas of VS Code. There are many benefits to working incrementally, but two were especially important for this effort:
```

**Adopting TypeScript 7 as the default (February 2026)**

The final move was to switch to TypeScript 7 for our normal development. By then, the TypeScript team's fixes had removed the blockers we had been working around, and because the incremental steps had already done most of the work, the code change for this was actually pretty minor. [Here's the change](https://github.com/microsoft/vscode/commit/86da9175ebfa985451eb324d2f94152d867ae3af) that switches our normal watch task to use TypeScript 7, for example.

We also made TypeScript 7 the default version used in the editor for the VS Code repo. We still support switching back to the older TypeScript as an escape hatch, but it has rarely been needed in practice. Most developers are happy to stay on TypeScript 7 because of its significantly better performance.

## The numbers
So, was it all worth it? The answer is a clear and resounding yes.

Here's a before-and-after comparison for type checking the main VS Code source code:

```
# TS 6.0
tsc --noEmit -p src/tsconfig.json
36 seconds

# TS 7
tsgo --noEmit -p src/tsconfig.json
5 seconds
```

> TypeScript 7 is more than seven times faster! That's especially impressive when you consider that these two tasks are doing the same work: they type check the same files with the same level of thoroughness and report the same errors. Just by switching from TypeScript 6 to TypeScript 7, we sped up our type checking by 7x.

Reviewer: Pretty fitting number! :D

> With TypeScript 7, we can also now type check all of our built-in extensions (except Copilot) in well under a second (and even the large Copilot extension still only takes 2.5 seconds).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With TypeScript 7, we can also now type check almost all of our built-in extensions in well under a second. The only exception is our larger Copilot extension, and that still only takes 2.5 seconds.
```

The results get even more impressive when we look at compiling and type checking all of VS Code, i.e. both our main source code and our roughly fifty built-in extension `tsconfig` projects. This is what the `npm run watch` command does, and it is also the command that developers working on VS Code typically run.

With TypeScript 6, `npm run watch` takes around 80 seconds to complete. After migrating to TypeScript 7, we dropped this time to just over 20 seconds: roughly four times faster. That's a whole minute saved in normal development and agent-assisted iteration every time a build needs to be restarted (re-checks after the initial watch completes are around a second at most).

> Those improvements also translate into better language tooling performance in the editor. For TypeScript language features in the editor, we need to load the whole `tsconfig` project before we can provide proper errors and complex features like auto imports. For the main VS Code project, that used to take close to a minute. Now it's around 10 seconds. That's roughly 50 seconds saved. With VS Code developers often reloading their editor windows multiple times per day, those saved seconds really add up. No more quick coffee runs while the editor tools are loading.

Reviewer: I'm actually a little bit surprised with the numbers for the editor experience. My experience is historically that a full project load used to take a minimum of 25-35 seconds on a good machine, and it's now basically under 2 seconds.
